update(blog)!: The Importance of Data Privacy For The Queer Community (#3044)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: blog/posts/importance-of-privacy-for-the-queer-community.md

<div class="admonition info" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Pride Series</p>

This article is part of our series for Pride month focusing on topics at the intersection of data privacy and LGBTQ+ experiences.

</div>

While it's difficult to get a complete estimate on this, due to fear of discrimination and other factors, a 2021 [survey](https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2021-06/LGBT%20Pride%202021%20Global%20Survey%20Report_3.pdf) conducted by Ipsos in 27 countries revealed that only 80% of the population surveyed identified as heterosexual. Additionally, about 1% of adults identified as a gender different from the one they were assigned at birth. This percentage is even higher for Gen Z and Millennials.

In the United States alone, it's [estimated](https://www.lgbttech.org/_files/ugd/d77b01_0e1e02c938e94ae3aad4ce21312bdde4.pdf) there are 20 million adults who are part of the LGBTQ+ community. That's a lot of people!

> Despite the progress of the past decades, the queer population still faces many challenges to be free and safe from discrimination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the progress of the past decades, the queer population still faces many challenges to being free and safe from discrimination.
```

Discrimination online, at work, at school, at the national or even the familial level, can put LGBTQ+ individuals in dangerous situations, where data privacy may be the only shield available for protection.

In this context, it's essential for the queer community to be well-informed on the tools and practices that can help mitigate the risks, so that information, services, and support can still be accessed safely.

## Higher risk when data gets exposed

Unfortunately, LGBTQ+ people are still at a higher risk when their personal data gets exposed.

> First, for people living in environments hostile to their sexual orientation or gender identity, keeping personal information private can literally mean life or death. Tragically, even today, many countries still criminalize homosexuality and gender identities different from cisgender. When this personal information gets exposed, people might lose support from their family, lose their job, get arrested, or even get [executed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_punishment_for_homosexuality) in some countries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, for people living in environments hostile to their sexual orientation or gender identity, keeping personal information private can literally mean life or death. Tragically, even today many countries still criminalize homosexuality and gender identities different from cisgender. When this personal information gets exposed, people might lose support from their family, lose their job, get arrested, or even be [executed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capital_punishment_for_homosexuality) in some countries.
```

### Being outed against one's will

For a queer person, deciding when, how, and to whom to reveal their sexuality or gender identity is a very important and intimate moment. It *must* be a personal choice, and only on the person's own terms.

Even in countries where queer identities and sexualities are legal and accepted, [being outed against one's will can have devastating consequences](https://www.pridecorner.org/post/how-to-support-someone-who-has-been-outed-against-their-will).

If someone lives with family members who do not accept who they are, getting outed against their will could mean losing their home and familial support. In other situations, perhaps their family is supportive, but their employer isn't, or maybe some of their friends or co-workers are hostile. They might want to keep this information from them in order to avoid conflicts at work, or avoid losing friendships. Further, there is of course the risk for discrimination, online harassment, and worse.

No matter the situation, coming out as queer should always be an individual and intentional choice.

> **It is an act of violence to out someone against their consent, even when performed by the intermediary of an algorithm or a neglectful data leak.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is an act of violence to out someone against their consent, even when performed by the intermediary of an algorithm or a neglectful data leak.
```

Each time there is a data breach that includes information about gender identity, sexuality, browsing history, location history, installed applications, or legal names, this data leak risks outing people against their will.

For all these reasons, it is vital that information be safeguarded so that a queer person is empowered to choose when, how, and to whom to come out on their own terms.

> In today's political climate, this is unfortunately even truer for trans people, who are at a greater risk of getting outed against their will when data about gender, sex, or legal name leaks. Sadly, there are still too many online forms and software that needlessly collect gender data when it's completely unnecessary. Similarly, requiring full *legal* name is completely irrelevant in many situations where it is asked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In today's political climate, this is unfortunately even truer for trans people, who are at a greater risk of getting outed against their will when data about their gender, sex, or legal name leaks. Sadly, there are still too many online forms and software that needlessly collect gender data when it's completely unnecessary. Similarly, requiring full *legal* name is completely irrelevant in many situations where it is currently asked.
```

Developers must take responsibility and design software and forms considering these risks. As data scientist and civic technologist Soren Spicknall explains brilliantly, gender data [should never be collected](https://medium.com/@SorenSpicknall/protecting-queer-communities-through-data-4707ae0cb562) unless *absolutely* necessary and *absolutely* protected, which in most instances it really isn't:

> "Is the danger to your LGBT+ users worth the ability to roughly guess whether somebody is buying a purse for themselves or as a gift, or to assume you know what kind of movie they want to watch?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "Is the danger to your LGBT+ users worth the ability to roughly guess whether somebody is buying a purse for themselves or as a gift, or to assume you know what kind of movie they want to watch?"
```

> Algorithms shouldn't be able to target sexuality and gender identity as markers for advertising purposes. There has already been reported incidents where [people were outed against their will by Facebook](https://www.dailydot.com/irl/facebook-ads-lgbtq/) spitting around rainbow ads everywhere, because of Facebook secretly tying someone's browsing activity back to their profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Algorithms shouldn't be able to target sexuality and gender identity as markers for advertising purposes. Unfortunately, there have already been reported incidents where [people were outed against their will by Facebook](https://www.dailydot.com/irl/facebook-ads-lgbtq/) spitting around rainbow ads everywhere, because of Facebook secretly tying someone's browsing activity back to their profile.
```

Facebook (and most other commercial platforms) uses cookies and other tracking technologies to follow users online and [build an advertising profile](https://www.makeuseof.com/tag/facebook-tracking-stop/) based on their online activity, even outside of Facebook. Then, it shows ads on Facebook related to that activity, no matter if this information was shared or not on the platform.

This kind of non-consensual outing can have devastating consequences, and should be forbidden by law. Everyone should be able to come out when and how they see fit, and not be aggressively outed by some Facebook or Google ad algorithm, or by some negligent data leak.

### Online harassment and extortion

The risk of having data about one's sexuality or gender identity revealed against one's will can be very dangerous for some people.

> With online harassment on the rise, this intimate information can get weaponized by bigots and extortionists to cause severe harm. Unfortunately, this isn't a rare occurrence, even in countries where the LGBTQ+ community is well accepted. Regrettably, some platforms have even started to [rollback previous protections against hate speech](https://apnews.com/article/social-media-lgbtq-tiktok-x-facebook-instagram-glaad-f790bda1bc3f169ef28ca3f441ea8447) and harassment. This will have a significantly detrimental impact on the safety of the queer community online.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With online harassment on the rise, this intimate information can be weaponized by bigots and extortionists to cause severe harm. Unfortunately, this isn't a rare occurrence, even in countries where the LGBTQ+ community is well accepted. Regrettably, some platforms have even started to [roll back previous protections against hate speech](https://apnews.com/article/social-media-lgbtq-tiktok-x-facebook-instagram-glaad-f790bda1bc3f169ef28ca3f441ea8447) and harassment. This will have a severely detrimental impact on the safety of the queer community online.
```

The LGBTQ advocacy organization GLAAD produced this year a [Social Media Safety Index](https://glaad.org/smsi/2025/platform-scorecard/) ratings six major platforms. The index rated TikTok, Facebook, Instagram, Youtube, Threads, and X, with X (formerly Twitter) getting the worse safety score of them all.

### Seeking health information

People questioning their gender identity or sexuality might seek information online about the health procedures or treatments they need.

> This sensitive search history can reveal a lot of personal details that should never get exposed against one's will. Sadly, browsing the internet without any tracking is a task that becomes harder every year, and many people aren't aware of the protections they can use against it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sensitive search history can reveal a lot of personal details that should never be exposed against one's will. Sadly, browsing the internet without any tracking is a task that becomes harder every year, and many people aren't aware of the protections they can use against this tracking.
```

> When sensitive data related to gender-affirming care or sexual health gets exposed, people can suffer from severe harm ranging from non-consensual outing to imprisonment. Discrimination related to this type of health information is still rampant in every country in the world.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People can suffer from severe harm when sensitive data related to their gender-affirming care or sexual health is exposed, ranging from non-consensual outing to imprisonment. Discrimination related to this type of health information is still rampant in every country in the world.
```

### Seeking community online

Seeking the support of online communities is common for queer people who can more easily feel isolated. This is especially true for youth living in hostile or rural environments, where smaller population density often means less supportive local resources and venues.

For people in these situations, finding community online can be essential to survival.

Despite all its flaws, the internet still offers a wonderful way to connect with others regardless of physical distances, and this is doubly true for the queer community.

The need for social connection and support from peers is a fundamental human need. No matter how dangerous this can be, not sharing information online is simply not a viable option for many queer people.

## Privacy-invasive practices that are exponentially worse for queer people

### Real-name policies

> Many privacy-invasive practices and policies are significantly more dangerous for LGBTQ+ people. For example, [Facebook and other platforms "real-name" policies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-name_system) are absolutely horrendous for transgender people.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many privacy-invasive practices and policies are significantly more dangerous for LGBTQ+ people. For example, [the "real-name" policies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Real-name_system) on Facebook and other platforms are absolutely horrendous for transgender people.
```

For many people around the world, the use of pseudonyms or chosen names online means safety, and this is even truer for trans people and other queer people.

### Single-account policies

Thankfully, most platforms aren't using such policies yet. But unfortunately, it does seem there could be a push to implement single-account policies in the near future.

With the multiplication of age verification laws and the proliferation of unregulated AI systems, there has been some talk of using unique identifiers to prevent the creation of multiple accounts. This is **a horrible idea for everyone**, and should never be allowed, but it's even worse for LGBTQ+ people.

Creating multiple accounts for different purposes, for example to separate work life from personal life, is a great privacy practice for anyone.

Multiple accounts on a same platform, or "alt accounts", are regularly used by queer people in order to be their full selves online, when they aren't fully out in their public or personal life, or just because they prefer to keep their queer identity and activities separated.

> Sadly, if single-account policies were to get implemented on platforms, this great privacy protection could soon disappear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sadly, if single-account policies begin to be implemented on platforms, this great privacy protection could soon disappear.
```

### Facial recognition

> Facial recognition is an especially problematic technology for transgender people. Many times, these algorithms will not only create a faceprint from the data, but will also try to infer gender from it.

Author: I don't mind changing it much, but faceprint is generally the term used in every discussion about this I have read. I have never seen the term facial identifier used to described this type of data collection before, so it might be less relevant to the specific definition.

These systems are deeply flawed and have discrimination biases built-in. They aren't even reliable to identify the correct gender of cisgender people. Because of the way these algorithms were developed, the use of this technology is [worse for transgender people](https://www.theswaddle.com/how-facial-recognition-ai-reinforces-discrimination-against-trans-people), and [exponentially worse](https://sciencepolicy.hsites.harvard.edu/blog/racial-discrimination-face-recognition-technology) for transgender people of color.

Tragically, legislation is lagging behind to protect us by regulating this biased, invasive, and inaccurate technology that is spreading faster and further every year.

### Public photos during events

These days, it's pretty much impossible to assist to any events without having our photo intrusively taken by a stranger and posted on Instagram without our consent.

This is a generally bad behavior that we should all work on improving culturally. Posting photos of strangers online without their consent can be much more harmful for queer people.

> For example, taking photos at a Pride event and posting it online, can out people against their will. While it's perhaps fair to assume most people *performing* in a Pride parade or on a stage might implicitly be comfortable with it, this isn't necessarily the case for people in the *audience*.

Author: No, I wouldn't put it in quote. It could give the impression this isn't really outing people, when it is. I think out is a term that doesn't require quote in this context.

Additionally, keep in mind that many platforms, including X, Facebook, and Reddit, will now use all your posted content to train their AI systems, making this information and embedded biases likely impossible to delete in the future.

Developing an awareness of what data is shared, who can access it, how it is secured, and how it is used, is very important to stay safe online.

### Securing data when communicating

Outside of social media platforms, many tools are available to help you secure your intimate and private communications.

While chatting on dating apps may be the first step to meeting new people, moving early to end-to-end encrypted channels is likely a good idea for data security and privacy.

That being said, also take into account that because your communications there will be fully end-to-end encrypted (only visible by its intended sender and recipient), there will be no moderation with it. Make sure you trust a person enough before moving the discussion to an end-to-end encrypted, more personal channel.

#### Instant messaging communication

> [Signal](https://signal.org/) is a wonderful end-to-end encrypted and free-to-use instant messaging app that [we recommend](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/real-time-communication/#signal). Signal will collect your phone number to create the account, but nothing else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Signal](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/real-time-communication/#signal) is a wonderful end-to-end encrypted and free-to-use instant messaging app. Signal will collect your phone number to create the account, but nothing else.
```

### Securing data when protesting

For this month of Pride, you might feel the need to join a protest more than a parade.

If you decide to join the action, make sure to secure your data properly to stay safe. Prepare your devices adequately to be ready and resist surveillance targeted at protesters. Consult our [Protesters' Guide to Smartphone Security](activists-guide-securing-your-smartphone.md), and make sure you understand well the level of risk of this particular protest. **Different protests in different regions require different levels of data protection.**

If you are organizing actions, try to stay away from corporate platforms who will willingly and quickly share your data with authorities (even private messages). If you must use corporate platforms, then make sure to limit the personal data you share there, and ensure attendees have alternative ways to contact you that do not require them to create an account, to register, or to use their legal name.

Having an independent website, or using a Fediverse-connected platform that will be accessible to everyone even without an account, are better ways to organize.

> For example, if you create a Mastodon account for your organization, people will not need to create a Mastodon account to read your posts and event announcements. All your posts will be accessible just like any independent websites would be (if you leave your posts' visibility public).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you create a Mastodon account for your organization, people will not need to create a Mastodon account to read your posts and event announcements. All your posts will be accessible just like any independent website would be (if you leave your posts' visibility public).
```

> Setting up an end-to-end encrypted email address, and using an [alias email address](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/email-aliasing/), are also good ways to stay accessible without requiring attendees to use a Facebook account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setting up an end-to-end encrypted email address and using an [alias email address](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/email-aliasing/) are also good ways to stay accessible without requiring attendees to use a Facebook account.
```
